previously on x-men torture the military
and the police using torture is it
ethically acceptable to torture one
person in order to extract information
in order to compel a confession that
could save the lives of 100 people so
typical scenario still today in 2019 the
police or the military are asking
themselves whether or not they should
torture someone who is this a suspected
terrorist because there is the
possibility that this will reveal
information that will save a hundred
people's lives that will prevent a
terrorist attack this is an ethical
question this is a matter of de ontology
this is a matter of right and wrong this
is a matter of doing the right thing
because the right thing to do so from my
perspective this kind of pleasure pain
and calculus just the original terms
used by John Stuart Mill this idea of
net happiness is totally irrelevant okay
either procedurally torture is correct
or incorrect okay okay I think he is
making this conflation so we have to
talk a little bit about like ethical
theory in general you just accused me of
making a conflation guess what Erin in
the rest of the video that follows you
utterly failed to demonstrate that I
conflated anything with anything else I
think before we do that though I think
what he's doing is is something like
this I think he's saying I think he's
making the following argument
calculating overall overall happiness is
irrelevant to
deontological assessments my argument is
not that it's irrelevant my argument is
that it's impossible so we could turn
this around and we could summarize your
position Aaron as being it's relevant to
ethics only in as much as it's possible
but oh wait you actually conceded the
point at several different stages in
this discussion that you agree with me
that it's not possible because we can't
know future outcomes we can't quantify
happiness we definitely can't quantify
happiness or pleasure in the same units
that we quantify harm being done quick
example Vietnam War was it justified was
it a good idea was it a good plan to
propose the United States invade and
conquer Vietnam well if you do this
[ __ ] pleasure or pain calculus if
you look at it from an a utilitarian
perspective you would have to compare
the unit values of farmers being shot
dead in their fields by Apache attack
helicopters helicopters mowing down and
massacring civilians you have to
quantify that relative to the value of
things like democracy and freedom of
speech and happiness and pleasure in
other vague senses sure wealth versus
poverty the different socio-economic
side effects having a communist versus
capitalist regime that's real hard to
quantify even in a situation that
extreme I've never heard anyone
seriously suggest that the utilitarian
calculus is possible let alone plausible
let alone philosophically or ethically
important let alone politically useful
in determining the rightness or wrong as
the decision to commence the Vietnam War
and why two reasons
let me repeat myself one you cannot know
the consequences of your actions and you
already conceded this point you already
agreed with me we're not talking with
the situation of a hypothetical time
traveler in a science fiction novel who
comes back into the past in the future
and knows exactly what's gonna happen if
result of he's out of each action and
therefore can speak to the good and evil
the amount of pleasure and pain
generated from each decision made in
history
tons of people began the war in Iraq
thinking as soon as the United States
and conquered Iraq there'd be regime
change similar to what happened the
Japan bird meat in Japan at the end of
World War two similar would happen in
the creation of the South Korean
Democratic regime but all the Americans
would have to do was march conquer and
then let the local people take over and
run their own democracy that's not what
happened in Iraq that's not what
happened in Afghanistan that may be
incredibly jejune or naive but an
imbecilic george w bush really believe
it george w bush was surrounded by
counselors and advisors who foresaw
consequences that turned out to be
completely fictional that from my
perspective were irrational but from
their perspective it was rational and
made sense
therefore a utilitarian style pleasure
pain calculus is never going to be
useful in determining whether or not the
United States should invade Iraq
Afghanistan or Vietnam it does not work
and the other point that I think you
have conceded also is that you can never
quantify pleasure and this is a problem
already for John Stuart Mill what does
pleasure mean in what sense can human
enjoyment or Felicity it will be
compared to palpable physical harm you
never return to the one example that is
set out here that you're answering
you're supposedly answering the question
of whether or not it can be justified to
torture someone to death in order to
gain military intelligence now if you
could see the future if you knew for a
fact that the military intelligence
you'd gain by torturing someone to death
would lead to defusing a bomb and saving
exactly 10,000 people's lives that would
be different but you don't know that you
concede at this point you could torture
someone and you could get intelligence
that's entirely false you could torture
someone and get intelligence that's
truthful but useless the one thing you
know for certain is if you torture
someone you're doing very real harm and
what you're comparing it to is a very
unreal and hypothetical benefit but we
have the further fundamental profound
problem that the benefits you're talking
about pleasure and happiness really are
things like the enjoyment human beings
find in eating meat they enjoy eating
steak they enjoy eating beef and it's
very different
to contrast and compare that enjoyment
with any unit value with any number
assigned to it compared to the
ecological harm done compared to the
torment the animal has to endure so on
and so forth okay the question is not
whether or not it is relevant or
irrelevant to consider utilitarian
pleasure pain calculus in ethics and in
politics the question is whether it's
possible or impossible and you already
conceded that I'm right on this and you
agree 90% if not a hundred percent
overall overall happiness is irrelevant
to deontological assessments of the
rightness or wrongness of an act 2,000
years later chuckling overall happiness
is irrelevant to ethics so first thing
we need to notice that this argument is
invalid even if this premise is true
that's not enough to guarantee that this
premise is true do you believe we live
in a world in which that calculus is
possible do you believe we live in a
world where there is a falsifiable
objectively real number that governments
can assign to the value of torturing
someone to death and the government of
Switzerland and the government United
States and the government of Canada and
the government of Scotland and the
government of Saudi Arabia when they do
the math they all come up with the same
number do you really believe that this
calculus exists do you really believe
that I am in the position of denying the
relevance of this calculus to moral
ethical and political questions or are
you conceding the point that this
calculation this equation never has
exists
it never has been possible it never has
been useful in political debates
including when different nations debate
their policy on torture and
extraordinary rendition and what
intelligence services do that in fact
this is only a notion that has existed
in the libraries of academic philosophy
and in the chalkboards of university
classrooms do you concede that point or
not I think you do
I think you're just being an [ __ ] I
think you're just trying to impress the
audience with your knowledge of textbook
philosophy that is completely unrelated
to the argument I'm really making
because you never come back to the
fundamental question you never commit to
saying that yes you believe you should
torture a person to death that yes you
believe you should launch a war on the
basis of this kind of imaginary calculus
you never come forward and say that you
think there's something real and true
and quantifiable and verifiable that's
revealed by creating this kind of
equation that this kind of equation is
not just an exercise in self-defense and
that's my position that's what it is if
someone tells you don't worry about the
harm done by opening a new casino don't
worry about the harm done
to people's lives by opening a new
casino because I'm confident but the
pleasure created by the casino the value
of the entertainment is greater than the
harm being done there is no way for that
claim to be anything other than hollow
propaganda if someone tells you don't
worry about the harm done by torturing
people to death because I'm confident
the number of lives saved the amount of
enjoyment pleasure the the benefits of
Western society the greatness of America
I'm sure that the benefits are
quantifiably so much greater you know
it's a lie you know it must be
propaganda it never can be true both
because the consequences are unknowable
and because as I've said what you call
happiness what you call pleasure what
you call benefit in these scenarios has
no unit it cannot be counted and the
reason is that he we haven't been told
that the ontology is the correct theory
there are other theories of how ethics
works so for example let's
say here's rush Schaefer Landau's book
he then rambles on to basically say that
he knows the names of some books and
some authors and he makes absolutely
zero effort to relate these authors that
he's citing to the argument I made or to
any of the problems I've presented but
he doesn't say oh and this is relevant
to solving the problem of governments
committing torture in a democratic
society or governments deciding to build
casinos even though they know cosima
casinos do real harm and the benefits of
the casino are much more debatable like
what is the meaning of happiness and
entertainment in the context of gambling
building a casino is not really
comparable to building a sewage
treatment plant but governments elect to
do these things so again
sincerity is a problem salience is a
problem and he never does back up his
claim or his threat that I'm guilty of
conflating something he started this by
saying that I was guilty of a conflation
error there was no conflation in my
argument and your argument it's worse
than true or false
it's just irrelevant the only positive
thing I can say about this interaction
with Aaron Yarnell the only positive
thing I can say is that it reminds me of
the reasons why I'm glad that I haven't
been stuck in an academic career for all
these years I'm glad that I'm not in a
ph.d program right now because I don't
have to put up with morons like you
Aaron I don't have to be flattering and
obsequious towards you I don't have to
treat you as a colleague I can tell you
straight to your face you were too
stupid to play this game you sound like
you're on psych meds I hope that you are
I hope that you're on neuroleptics I
hope that you're on heavy
antidepressants or anti-psychotic drugs
I hope because then you can quit and you
can get better if you're not on psych
meds homie I'm sorry you're stuck with
this this is who you are for the rest of
your life enjoy your PhD enjoy your MA
enjoy your mysterious charitable
foundation you've graded for
the teaching of public philosophy
because you suck at it
you're a great example of someone who's
chosen to focus on your own area of
greatest weakness I mean really people
like to disrespect my truth but the fact
is that you know my name is I don't know